KEP-5307 Initial KEP for container restart exceptions (#5308)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-node/5307-container-restart-policy/README.md

Consider the example, the Pod is a part of a large training job. The progress
of each training “step” is only made when all Pods completed the calculation
for this step. Each Pod starts from a checkpoint, they all make progress
together, and write a new checkpoint. If any of Pods failed, the fastest
way to restart the calculation is to interrupt all Pods by restarting them,
so they all will start from the previous checkpoint. Thus, a special handling
of this restart is required.

There are a few reasons why the OnFailure restart policy will not work:

1) The cases of failed hardware must result in a Pod failure and rescheduling.
There needs to be a differentiation of these two failures - caused by hardware
issue and caused by a in-place restart request.

2) Pods are often parts of JobSets with the Job failure policy configured
(see https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/job/pod-failure-policy/). The pod
failure policy is a server-side policy and is not compatible with the Pods
with restartPolicy OnFailure.

### Goals

<!--
List the specific goals of the KEP. What is it trying to achieve? How will we
know that this has succeeded?
-->

> - Allow the Pod with the restartPolicy=Custom to keep restarting a container

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Introduce API which allows to keep restarting a container
```
I guess at this point we don't need to provide the shape of the API

Author: Thanks, adjusted.

on a specific exit code.
- Allow extensibility of an API to support more scenarios in future.

### Non-Goals

<!--
What is out of scope for this KEP? Listing non-goals helps to focus discussion
and make progress.
-->

- Implement the ​​maxRestartTimes https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3322
- Support all possible restart policy rules in this KEP - some may be ideas for the future

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (Optional)

<!--
Detail the things that people will be able to do if this KEP is implemented.
Include as much detail as possible so that people can understand the "how" of
the system. The goal here is to make this feel real for users without getting
bogged down.
-->

#### Story 1

> The Pod with two containers - one is the main container and one is the sidecar

Reviewer: I would suggest to orient the "Story" from the perspective of the Kubernetes users.  For example, as an ML researcher I'm creating long-running  AI/ML workloads. Pods in such workloads are unavoidable due to various reasons, but in many cases they are recoverable. I would like to be able to avoid re-scheduling the workload as this consumes signifficant amount of time, and only restart the failed container "in-place".

Feel free to rephrase as you see fit.

Author: Rephrased this from user's perspective.

As training jobs are similar in nature, processing of a next job may be done using
the same Pods. Sidecar container coordinates the jobs. Once a new job needs to be
started, sidecar containers are killing the main job, and expect that the container
will be restarted quickly and pick up a new task to execute.

Since those jobs are often declared as a Job, with [pod failure policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/job/pod-failure-policy/),
the error that was the result of a sidecar killing the container should be
ignored on kubelet and container needs to be restarted quickly.

See https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/jobset/issues/876 for the detailed description.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

The container level restart policy may restart the container differently from
the existing assumptions on pod level restart policy. Pod with `restartPolicy=Never`
may have containers restarted and have the restart count higher than 0. This may

> also affect how Job `podFailurePolicy` interacts with pod failures.

Reviewer: Actually, I think this approach is fully transparent to the Job controller, because the Job controller only matches Pods in terminal phase. It is mentioned here: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/fc234c10fe886bb3dcdf3499ae822e0650fb1179/keps/sig-apps/3329-retriable-and-non-retriable-failures/README.md?plain=1#L902-L903

Author: Thanks, clarified this part.

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

> #### Controllers managing pod failures

Reviewer: TBH, I don't think this is a risk, because Job controller with podFailurePolicy only looks at failed pods already, when "restartPolicy: Never". It could be a risk if we used "restartPolicy: OnFailure" at the Pod's level. 

Instead of the risk I would suggest expanding the "Notes/Constraints/Caveats" with that comment.

podFailurePolicy) might misinterpret the Pod's state. A container restarting
due to an "ignored" exit code might not increment the Pod's restart count
in a way that these controllers expect for failure accounting.

In this case, Job controller with podFailurePolicy only execute the policy
after the Pod is no longer in Running phase. A container restart will not
change the Pod's phase. Therefore this works fine with Job's podFailurePolicy
without any necessary changes to the Job controller or Job API.

#### Unintended Restart Loops

A container might persistently exit with an "ignored" exit code due to
an unresolvable underlying issue, leading to frequent restarts that consume
node resources and potentially mask the problem.

The container restart will still follow the exponential backoff to avoid
excessive resource consumption due to restarts.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

> The proposal is to implement a simple API with the very limited set of
> allowed values to [Container](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L2528)
> under k8s.io/apis/core. The shape of API is informed by some future improvements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposal is to extend the Pod's [container API](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L2528) to allow to restarting containers based on 
the container's end state, e.g. exit code. 
```
I would suggest to avoid using adjective like "simple API", or "very limited set". Let's leave it to the readers / reviewers to assess.

we may need to implement as described here:

> https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3329#issuecomment-1571643421

Reviewer: Actually, this reference is slightly different that the current proposal. One difference is that the reference assumes "OnFailure". Instead of design details I would propose to move it to the Notes and Caveats section.

Author: Thanks, linked this to the notes section. Explained a bit how this stems form the original discussion.

```yaml
restartPolicy: Never
containers:
- name: myapp1
  # the default behavior is inherited from the Pod’s restartPolicy

>   restartPolicy: Custom 

Reviewer: I would suggest to consider alternative names, maybe:
- "RuleBased" 
- "Conditional"

I'm leaning to "RuleBased" to match the "restartRules" name.

  # pod-level API for specifying container restart rules

>   restartRules: 

Reviewer: I would suggest to propose the full API, similarly as [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/fc234c10fe886bb3dcdf3499ae822e0650fb1179/keps/sig-apps/3329-retriable-and-non-retriable-failures/README.md?plain=1#L1354), and provide this yaml as an example.

Author: Thanks, I added the full API, please take a look at let me know if you have any questions or concerns, cc @SergeyKanzhelev

Author: Removed restartPolicy. The rules in restartRules will try to match in order; if no rules match, the behavior will fallback to pod's restartPolicy configuration.

- The `operator` can be either `In` or `NotIn`;
- Values only support an array of integers and no wildcard. Empty list
is supported to express “any”.

With the limitations above, an API will do nothing for pods with the
`restartPolicy=Always` as `Ignore` for specific exit code are restartable
already. Same for the `restartPolicy=OnFailure`, except the exit code 0
can be configured to be restartable, which is effectively the same as
`restartPolicy=Always`.

For the pod with the `restartPolicy=Never`, it will allow restarting
the container for the subset of exit codes. The sync and restart logic
will be implemented in k8s.io/kubelet/container.

This API change is only intended to restart the container if the container
itself exited with the given list of exit codes. It is not intended to change
the behavior of other means that lead to container being restarted, for
example, pod resize or pod restart.

The restart count will increment on each container exit. So there will be
a new possibilities - Pod with the `restartPolicy=Never` may have containers
with the restart count higher than 0. It was only possible for sidecar
containers.

> This works with Job `podFailurePolicy` without any changes on Job API. Currently,

Reviewer: I think a remark on the Job's podFailurePolicy belongs more to the "caveats" section, we could maybe just link from here.

Author: Moved to caveats section

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This KEP introduces restart rules for a container so kubelet can apply
those rules on container failure. This will allow users to configure special
exit codes of the container to be treated as non-failure and restart the

> container in-place even if the Pod has a restartPolicy=Never. This scenario is

Reviewer 2: I still kinda feel like we should have a special restartPolicy for this. "Never" isn't accurate is it?

Author: We would like to have this on the container level. However, it seems adding a new enum is hard (https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CJUQN3E4T/p1749761614423309), as the logic of detecting sidecar containers primarily depends on `containerRestartPolicy=Always`, and there is a plan for the future to make the exit of sidecar containers to terminate the whole pod.

See details on other related issues around container restart: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1UmJHJzdmMA1hWwkoP1f3rG9nS0oZ2cRcOx8rO8MsExA

the container. 

This is already possible for sidecar containers which have container-level
`restartPolicy=Always`.

#### Job PodFailurePolicy

This will not affect how Job `podFailurePolicy` interacts with pod failures,
because container-level restart will not be considered as Pod termination.
The Job controller only checks and evaluates `podFailurePolicy` after a Pod
is terminated, as mentioned in the [KEP-3329](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/fc234c10fe886bb3dcdf3499ae822e0650fb1179/keps/sig-apps/3329-retriable-and-non-retriable-failures/README.md?plain=1#L902-L903).

This KEP is informed from the discussion about some future improvements 
we may need to implement as described here for JobSet:
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3329#issuecomment-1571643421.
Instead of making Job controller to handle container-level restart and failures,
kubelet is more suitable to handle the container restart policy. This aligns
with the current implementation that Job controller only restart / reschedule
the Pod after it is terminated, and delegate the rest to the kubelet.

This enables efficient setups to accelerate container restart and to improve

> resource utilization. For example,Jobs configured with `podFailurePolicy` for

Author: thanks

hardware failures  (Pod needs to be rescheduled to other nodes), and containers
configured with `restartRules` to restart in-place for training errors.

#### ​maxRestartTimes 
`maxRestartTimes` is another ongoing [KEP-3322](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3322)
that provides an Pod API to allow the user to specify a maximum number of
restarts. How should Container `restartRules` interacts with the Pod 
`maxRestartTimes` is being discussed. The current understanding is that the
containers restarted by `restartRules` will count towards container restarts
of all other APIs.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Unintended Restart Loops

A container might persistently exit with an "Restart" exit code due to
an unresolvable underlying issue, leading to frequent restarts that consume
node resources and potentially mask the problem.

The container restart will still follow the exponential backoff to avoid
excessive resource consumption due to restarts.

Although this introduces exponential delay for container restart, it still

> aligns with the goal of expediting in-place container restart. First, the

Reviewer 2: Is this for restartPolicy Always as well? seems odd it wouldn't affect both

```go
type Container struct {
  // Omitting irrelevant fields...

  // Represents a list of rules to be checked to determine if the
  // container should be restarted on exit. The rules are evaluated in
  // order. Once a rule matches a container exit condition, the remaining
  // rules are ignored. If no rule matches the container exit condition,
  // the Pod-level restart policy determines the whether the container
  // is restarted or not.
  RestartRules []ContainerRestartRule
}

// ContainerRestartRule describes how a container exit is handled.
type ContainerRestartRule struct {
  // Specifies the action taken on a container exit if the requirements
  // are satisfied. The only possible value is "Restart" to restart the
  // container.
  Action ContainerRestartRuleAction
  
  // Represents the requirement on the container exit codes.
  OnExitCodes *ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesRequirement
}

type ContainerRestartRuleAction string

const (
  ContainerRestartRuleActionRestart ContainerRestartRuleAction = "Restart"
)

// ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesRequirement describes the requirement
// for handling an exited container based on its exit codes.

> type ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesRequirement struct {

Reviewer 2: requirement feels a bit verbose to me

Author: renamed this to remove the requirement

  // Represents the relationship between the container exit code(s) and the
	// specified values. Possible values are:
	//
	// - In: the requirement is satisfied if the container exit code is in the 
  //   set of specified values.
	// - NotIn: the requirement is satisfied if the container exit code is 
  //   not in the set of specified values.
  Operator ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOperator

  // Specifies the set of values to check for container exit codes.
  // At most 255 elements are allowed.
  Values []int32
}

type ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOperator string

const (
  ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOpIn ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOperator = "In"

>   ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOpNotIn ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOperator = "NotIn"

Reviewer 2: personally I think listing the codes would cover the cases in a clearer way but I am open to this.

Reviewer 2: hm actually I see what you are doing here and I take it back, the in/not in language is fine I think.

rules action is `Restart`. Same for the pods with pod-level 
`restartPolicy=OnFailure`. Except that exit code 0 can be configured 
to be restartable, which is effectively the same as `restartPolicy=Always`.

For the pod with the `restartPolicy=Never`, it will allow restarting
the container for the subset of exit codes. The sync and restart logic
will be implemented in k8s.io/kubelet/container.

Similarly for sidecar init containers with `restartPolicy=Always`, setting
`restartRules` has no effect because the only action is `Restart`.

This API change is only intended to restart the container if the container
itself exited with the given list of exit codes. It is not intended to change
the behavior of other means that lead to container being restarted, for
example, pod resize or pod restart.

See more discussion on how this API interacts with other components like Job
controller in [Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)](#notesconstraintscaveats-optional).

This API will support regular "app" containers as discussed above. 

For init containers, this API will repeatedly restart the init container if
it failed with the exit code specified in the restartRules until it succeeds

> (exit=0). For Pods with `restartPolidy=Never`, the `restartRules` override it.

Reviewer 2: restartPolicy*

- N installs
- Allowing time for feedback
- All issues and gaps identified as feedback during beta are resolved

**Note:** GA criteria must not include any functional, security, monitoring, or testing requirements.  Those must be beta requirements.

**Note:** Generally we also wait at least two releases between beta and
GA/stable, because there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md

#### Deprecation

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing flag
- Two versions passed since introducing the functionality that deprecates the flag (to address version skew)
- Address feedback on usage/changed behavior, provided on GitHub issues
- Deprecate the flag
-->

#### Alpha 

- Container restart policy added to the API.
- Container restart policy implemented behind a feature flag.
- Initial e2e tests completed and enabled.

#### Beta

- Container restart policy functionality running behind feature flag
for at least one release.

> - Container restart policy runs well with Job controller.

Reviewer 2: what does this mean?

Author: Just adding some outlines here; beta graduation criteria can be filled out later

  ContainerRestartPolicyNever ContainerRestartPolicy = "Never"
  ContainerRestartPolicyOnFailure ContainerRestartPolicyOnFailure = "OnFailure"
)

type Container struct {
  // Omitting irrelevant fields...
  // RestartPolicy must be specified if RestartPolicyException is specified.
  RestartPolicy *ContainerRestartPolicy

  // Represents a list of rules to be checked to determine if the
  // container should be restarted on exit. The rules are evaluated in
  // order. Once a rule matches a container exit condition, the remaining
  // rules are ignored. If no rule matches the container exit condition,
  // the Pod-level restart policy determines the whether the container
  // is restarted or not.
  RestartPolicyExceptions []ContainerRestartException
}

// ContainerRestartException describes how a container exit is handled.
type ContainerRestartException struct {
  // Specifies the action taken on a container exit if the requirements
  // are satisfied. The only possible value is "Restart" to restart the
  // container.
  Action ContainerRestartExceptionAction
  
  // Represents the requirement on the container exit codes.

>   OnExitCodes *ContainerRestartExceptionOnExitCodesRequirement

Reviewer 3: let's make it a "Condition" and add a note about the desire to support CEL

[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

<!--
This section is incredibly important for producing high-quality, user-focused
documentation such as release notes or a development roadmap. It should be
possible to collect this information before implementation begins, in order to
avoid requiring implementors to split their attention between writing release
notes and implementing the feature itself. KEP editors and SIG Docs
should help to ensure that the tone and content of the `Summary` section is
useful for a wide audience.

A good summary is probably at least a paragraph in length.

Both in this section and below, follow the guidelines of the [documentation
style guide]. In particular, wrap lines to a reasonable length, to make it
easier for reviewers to cite specific portions, and to minimize diff churn on
updates.

[documentation style guide]: https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/style-guide.md
-->

This KEP introduces restart policies for a container so kubelet can apply
those rules on container failure. It extends the existing Never, OnFailure,

> and Always restart policies. This will allow users to configure special exit

Author: Thanks for pointing this out. Fixed.

// for handling an exited container based on its exit codes.
type ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesRequirement struct {
  // Represents the relationship between the container exit code(s) and the
	// specified values. Possible values are:
	//
	// - In: the requirement is satisfied if the container exit code is in the 
  //   set of specified values.
	// - NotIn: the requirement is satisfied if the container exit code is 
  //   not in the set of specified values.
  Operator ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOperator

  // Specifies the set of values to check for container exit codes.
  // At most 255 elements are allowed.
  Values []int32
}

type ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOperator string

const (
  ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOpIn ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOperator = "In"
  ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOpNotIn ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOperator = "NotIn"
)
```

To specify a container to only restart with an exit code of 42, it
can be specified as following in a Pod manifest:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: my-pod
spec:
  containers:
  - name: my-container
    image: nginx:latest
    ports:
    - containerPort: 80

>     restartPolicy: RuleBased

Author: I think this may create a confusion when there is a conflict between restartPolicy and restartRules. Perhaps we should clarify that if both restartPolicy and restartRules are set, the restartRules will match first, and fallback to restartPolicy if no rules matched? In that case, I agree we can drop the "RuleBased" value.

>     restartPolicy: RuleBased

Author: Synced again, I agree we can remove this. The container restart behavior will fallback to Pod's restartPolicy if no rules matched.

- a search in the Kubernetes bug triage tool (https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html)
-->

Unit and E2E tests provide sufficient coverage for the feature. Integration tests may be added to cover any gaps that are discovered in the future.

##### e2e tests

<!--
This question should be filled when targeting a release.
For Alpha, describe what tests will be added to ensure proper quality of the enhancement.

For Beta and GA, document that tests have been written,
have been executed regularly, and have been stable.
This can be done with:
- permalinks to the GitHub source code
- links to the periodic job (typically a job owned by the SIG responsible for the feature), filtered by the test name
- a search in the Kubernetes bug triage tool (https://storage.googleapis.com/k8s-triage/index.html)

We expect no non-infra related flakes in the last month as a GA graduation criteria.
If e2e tests are not necessary or useful, explain why.
-->

- Verify that containers can specify restartPolicy.
- Verify that containers exited with exit codes specified in the restart
policy are restarted and the pod keeps running.

> - Verify that containers exited with exit codes not specified in the restart

Reviewer 4: Should we add an e2e test to confirm this works fine with PodFailurePolicy?

@mimowo

Reviewer: +1, yes, a sanity check will be helpful

When a workload fails (with a retriable exit code), I would like the container to be 
restarted quickly and avoid re-scheduling the pod because this consumes significant
amount of time and resource. Restarting the failed container "in-place" is critical
for a better utilization of compute resources. The container should only restart
"in-place" if it failed due to a retriable error; the container and pod should
terminate and possibly reschedule if the failure is not retriable. 

Since AI/ML training workloads are often declared as Job, with [PodFailurePolicy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/job/pod-failure-policy/),
some errors should be treated as retriable and restart the container in-place
by the kubelet, without re-creating and re-scheduling the Pod.

See https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/jobset/issues/876 for the detailed description.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

#### Container Restart Count

> The container level restart policy may restart the container differently from

Author: Sorry for the confusion on the title and terms since it has been iterated a few times. Currently the proposal is only to add a `restartRules` API on the Container, no change to `restartPolicy`. From a high-level, this is a per-container override for the restart behaviors.

> The container level restart policy may restart the container differently from

Reviewer 5: "override" is a way of saying "we're giving up on the previous things".

> The container level restart policy may restart the container differently from

Author: Refer to https://docs.google.com/document/d/1UmJHJzdmMA1hWwkoP1f3rG9nS0oZ2cRcOx8rO8MsExA/edit?resourcekey=0-OuKspBji_1KJlj2JbnZkgQ&tab=t.0 for possible rules / actions / conditions

kubelet is more suitable to handle the container restart policy. This aligns
with the current implementation that Job controller only restart / reschedule
the Pod after it is terminated, and delegate the rest to the kubelet.

This enables efficient setups to accelerate container restart and to improve
resource utilization. For example,Jobs configured with `podFailurePolicy` for
hardware failures  (Pod needs to be rescheduled to other nodes), and containers
configured with `restartRules` to restart in-place for training errors.

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

#### Unintended Restart Loops

A container might persistently exit with an "Restart" exit code due to
an unresolvable underlying issue, leading to frequent restarts that consume
node resources and potentially mask the problem.

> The container restart will still follow the exponential backoff to avoid

Author: I would say although this introduces exponential delay for container restart, it still aligns with the goal of expediting in-place container restart. First, the in-place restart avoids the expensive Pod re-scheduling to a different node. Second, if the container keeps restarting due to an exit code specified in the restart rules and stuck in a CrashLoop, it is probably not a retry-able error, the exponential backoff can avoid overwhelming the node with frequent restarts.

Added this to the README as well.

> The container restart will still follow the exponential backoff to avoid

Reviewer 5: You make allusions to `expensive Pod re-scheduling to a different node` but I think that is irrelvant in this KEP.  Pods have restart policies which allow for in-place restarts already.  The fact that higher-level abstractions chose not to use the policies is not really relevant here.

What I think this KEP is saying is that the existing restart policy mechanism is insufficient for some classes of workloads, and so we should extend it, which makes it useful in more cases.

excessive resource consumption due to restarts.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

> The proposal is to extend the Pod's [Container API type](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L2528) 

Reviewer 5: I apologize for going round and round on this, but what I am seeing doesn't all add up.  Trying to understand what I am missing.

Why would someone set `restartPolicy: Never` if they actually want restarts?

> The proposal is to extend the Pod's [Container API type](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L2528) 

Reviewer 2: +1 https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5308/files#r2141010830

> The proposal is to extend the Pod's [Container API type](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L2528) 

Reviewer 3: we clarified it here: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1UmJHJzdmMA1hWwkoP1f3rG9nS0oZ2cRcOx8rO8MsExA/edit?resourcekey=0-OuKspBji_1KJlj2JbnZkgQ&tab=t.0

with a new field `ContainerRestartrRules`. A list of rules will be evaluate
in order to determine the action of container exit based on the conditions.
The initial proposal supports only one action, "Restart", to restart the container.
The initial proposal supports only exit code as requirement for the rules.

The proposed API is as following:

```go
type Container struct {
  // Omitting irrelevant fields...

>   // Can only be specified if the RestartPolicy is not "RuleBased".

Author: Sorry for the confusion, we decided to remove this from previous discussions, just cleaned this up. 
Currently we only want to add the "restartRules" as a field to Container API.

  // Represents a list of rules to be checked to determine if the
  // container should be restarted on exit. The rules are evaluated in
  // order. Once a rule matches a container exit condition, the remaining
  // rules are ignored. If no rule matches the container exit condition,
  // the Pod-level restart policy determines the whether the container
  // is restarted or not.
  RestartRules []ContainerRestartRule
}

// ContainerRestartRule describes how a container exit is handled.
type ContainerRestartRule struct {
  // Specifies the action taken on a container exit if the requirements

>   // are satisfied. The only possible value is "Restart" to restart the

Reviewer 5: What other possible values could be here in future?

Author: I would say something like "Terminate"? So containers with a "restartPolicy=Always" can still fail on some exit codes. I'm not aware of such usage currently, so we are only proposing "Restart" and leave some room for future.

Author: I checked back on the original discussion, one possible action could be to terminate the Pod on container exit, see [past KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3582)

  // container.

>   Action *ContainerRestartRuleAction

Author: Thanks for catching this, was a typo.

  
  // Represents the requirement on the container exit codes.

>   OnExitCodes ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesRequirement

Reviewer 5: Hypothetically what other rules could be defined here?

Author: Mirroring from [PodFailurePolicy](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/batch/types.go#L169-L204), this could extend to other container status, but not scoped for this KEP

Author: Checked on the original discussion, other possible conditions could be:
- Container/pod being OOM killed
- Eviction
- Resource contention

}

type ContainerRestartRuleAction string

const (
  ContainerRestartRuleActionRestart ContainerRestartRuleAction = "Restart"
)

// ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesRequirement describes the requirement
// for handling an exited container based on its exit codes.
type ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesRequirement struct {
  // Represents the relationship between the container exit code(s) and the
	// specified values. Possible values are:
	//
	// - In: the requirement is satisfied if the container exit code is in the 
  //   set of specified values.
	// - NotIn: the requirement is satisfied if the container exit code is 
  //   not in the set of specified values.

>   Operator ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOperator

Reviewer 5: This sort of "grammar" in YAML is always awkward.  What are the real use cases?  Do we need "a few" codes or do we really expect people to specify many?  Would a range be better?

Author: Since this API stems from the discussion of Job's PodFailurePolicy (see https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3329#issuecomment-1571643421), the shape is similar to the Job's PodFailurePolicy. I would expect the user to specify a restartRule using only a limited set of exit codes (representing retry-able errors). cc @SergeyKanzhelev, do you have Cx experiences related to this?

conditions and actions. Please refer to [this document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1UmJHJzdmMA1hWwkoP1f3rG9nS0oZ2cRcOx8rO8MsExA/edit?resourcekey=0-OuKspBji_1KJlj2JbnZkgQ&tab=t.0).

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Unintended Restart Loops

A container might persistently exit with an "Restart" exit code due to
an unresolvable underlying issue, leading to frequent restarts that consume
node resources and potentially mask the problem.

The container restart will still follow the exponential backoff to avoid
excessive resource consumption due to restarts.

Although this introduces exponential delay for container restart, it still
aligns with the goal of expediting in-place container restart. First, the
in-place restart avoids the expensive Pod re-scheduling to a different node.
Second, if the container keeps restarting due to an exit code specified in
the restart rules and stuck in a CrashLoop, it is probably not a retry-able
error, the exponential backoff can avoid overwhelming the node with frequent
restarts.

## Design Details

The proposal is to extend the Pod's [Container API type](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/apis/core/types.go#L2528) 

> with a new field `restartPolicyExceptions`.

Author: SGTM cc @SergeyKanzhelev

> The Pod’s specified restartPolicy (Always / Never / OnFailure) will act as 

Author: Thanks, clarified the latter.

the default behavior for each container. Containers will inherit the 
`restartPolicy` from the Pod. The user has the ability to specify a 
`restartPolicy` on the container, which will replace the inherited 
`restartPolicy` from the Pod. Same as now, for Sidecar containers, 

> the user needs to specify container `restartPolicy=Always`.

Author: SG, adding this to the alpha graduation criteria

Additionally, each container could have its own `restartPolicyExceptions`. 
If the `restartPolicyExceptions` field is specified, then the user must 

> also specify the container `restartPolicy` which is defined next to it. 

Author: From our discussion this helps to clarify the rules are evaluated first and the clarify the default action. If restartPolicyExceptions are set, users would be required to explicitly declare the restartPolicy on the container, even if it's the default.

The rules will be evaluated in order; if none of the rules’ conditions matched,
the default action will fallback to container’s `restartPolicy`.

The initial proposal supports only one action, "Restart", to restart the container.

The initial proposal supports only exit code as requirement for the rules.

The proposed API is as following:

```go
type ContainerRestartPolicy string

const (
	ContainerRestartPolicyAlways ContainerRestartPolicy = "Always"
  ContainerRestartPolicyNever ContainerRestartPolicy = "Never"
  ContainerRestartPolicyOnFailure ContainerRestartPolicyOnFailure = "OnFailure"
)

type Container struct {
  // Omitting irrelevant fields...
  // RestartPolicy must be specified if RestartPolicyException is specified.
  RestartPolicy *ContainerRestartPolicy

  // Represents a list of rules to be checked to determine if the
  // container should be restarted on exit. The rules are evaluated in
  // order. Once a rule matches a container exit condition, the remaining
  // rules are ignored. If no rule matches the container exit condition,
  // the Pod-level restart policy determines the whether the container
  // is restarted or not.

>   RestartPolicyExceptions []ContainerRestartException

Reviewer 5: Don't necessarily need this API to be final, but please think about how all of these would be validated.

How many rules are allowed?
Can there be many rules that have the same action?
Can there be two identical rules or do we need to forbid that?
Which fields are required vs optional?
How many codes can be in the list?

Author: Some initial thoughts:
- at most 20 rules, similar to [PodFailurePolicy](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/060ed4e99aaa30ad65600427ec1b9ee4fa64d3d1/pkg/apis/batch/types.go#L254)
- Yes, rules can have same action, since ordering matters, same action with different conditions can have different meanings.
- I don't think there is a strong reason to forbid identical rules.
- Action is required; one-of the "when" condition must be provided.
- At most 255 exit codes in the list, also similar to [PodFailurePolicy](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/060ed4e99aaa30ad65600427ec1b9ee4fa64d3d1/pkg/apis/batch/types.go#L201)

Reviewer 5: don't tell me, update the KEP :)

}

// ContainerRestartException describes how a container exit is handled.
type ContainerRestartException struct {
  // Specifies the action taken on a container exit if the requirements
  // are satisfied. The only possible value is "Restart" to restart the
  // container.
  Action ContainerRestartExceptionAction

  // Represents the exit codes to check on container exits.

>   OnExitCodes ContainerRestartExceptionConditionOnExitCodes

Reviewer 5: I expect this is going to be a one-of construct right?  We can do it either as:

```
spec:
  containers:
  - # other stuff ...
    restartPolicyRules:
    - action: Restart
      onExitCodes:
        operator: In
        values: [ 42 ]
```

or:

```
spec:
  containers:
  - # other stuff ...
    restartPolicyRules:
    - action: Restart
      when:
        exitCode:
          operator: In
          values: [ 42 ]
```

There's a soft convention that one-of groupings go in a struct together, so the second option is slightly preferred.  That way you can extend to:

```
spec:
  containers:
  - # other stuff ...
    restartPolicyRules:
    - action: RestartPod
      when:
        oomKill:
          scope: Local
```

Either way, all one-of options should comment that they are part of a one-of, and they must be optional and pointers.

Author: SG, changing this to one-of.

a  `restartPolicy` on the container, which will override the `restartPolicy`
from the Pod. If the container `restartPolicy` is not specified, the pod
`restartPolicy` will be used. Same as now, for Sidecar containers, the user
needs to specify container `restartPolicy=Always` on an init container.

Additionally, each container could have its own `restartPolicyRules`. 
If the `restartPolicyRules` field is specified, then the user must 
also specify the container `restartPolicy` which is defined next to it. 
The `restartPolicyRules` define a list of rules to apply on container exit.
Each rule will consist of a condition (onExitCodes, OOM killed, eviction,
resource contention etc.) and an action (Restart, Terminate, TerminatePod, etc.)
The rules will be evaluated in order; if none of the rules’ conditions matched,
the default action will fallback to container’s `restartPolicy`.

The initial proposal supports only one action, "Restart", to restart the container.

The initial proposal supports only exit code as requirement for the rules.

The proposed API is as following:

```go
type ContainerRestartPolicy string

const (
	ContainerRestartPolicyAlways ContainerRestartPolicy = "Always"

>   ContainerRestartPolicyNever ContainerRestartPolicy = "Never"

Reviewer 6: nit: spacing is off here

// for handling an exited container based on its exit codes.
type ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodes struct {
  // Represents the relationship between the container exit code(s) and the
	// specified values. Possible values are:
	//
	// - In: the requirement is satisfied if the container exit code is in the 
  //   set of specified values.
	// - NotIn: the requirement is satisfied if the container exit code is 
  //   not in the set of specified values.
  Operator ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOperator

  // Specifies the set of values to check for container exit codes.
  // At most 255 elements are allowed.
  Values []int32
}

type ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOperator string

const (
  ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOpIn ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOperator = "In"
  ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOpNotIn ContainerRestartRuleOnExitCodesOperator = "NotIn"
)
```

To specify a container to only restart with an exit code of 42, it
can be specified as following in a Pod manifest:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: my-pod
spec:
  containers:
  - name: my-container
    image: nginx:latest
    # restartPolicy must be specified to specify restartPolicyRules

>     restartPolicy: Never

Reviewer 6: This doesn't read great :( But I understand that we can't introduce a Custom rule here.

Reviewer 3: yes, agree, but we discussed it at length with no better option to express this without breaking existing customers

NOT all actions and conditions are included for this KEP.

To deploy a pod with 
- an init container that should be retried for 10 times,
- a sidecar container,
- a regular container that should only be restarted on exit code 42, and
- a regular (keystone) container, the exit of which should fail the pod:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: my-pod
spec:
  restartPolicy: Never
  initContainers:
  - name: retry-init
    image: xxx
    restartPolicy: Never # This needs to be specified because restart rules is specified.
    restartPolicyRules:
    - action: Complete
      when:
        restartTimes: 10
    - action: Restart
      when:
        exitCodes:
          operator: NotIn
          values: [0]
  - name: sidecar
    image: xxx
    restartPolicy: Always # Indicates a sidecar container
  containers:
  - name: regular-container
    image: xxx
    restartPolicy: Never
    restartPolicyRules:
    - action: Restart
      when:
        exitCodes:
          operator: In
          values: [42]
  - name: keystone-container
    image: xxx
    restartPolicyRules:
    - action: TerminatePod
      when:
        exitCodes:
          operator: NotIn
          values: []
```

> The proposal is to support the following combinations:

Reviewer 3: for this KEP till GA and handle other combinations in other KEPs

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

If the feature is re-enabled, the kubelet will once again recognize and enforce
the restartPolicyRules for any Pods that have the field defined. The container
restart logic described in the KEP will become active again.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

<!--
The e2e framework does not currently support enabling or disabling feature
gates. However, unit tests in each component dealing with managing data, created
with and without the feature, are necessary. At the very least, think about
conversion tests if API types are being modified.

Additionally, for features that are introducing a new API field, unit tests that
are exercising the `switch` of feature gate itself (what happens if I disable a
feature gate after having objects written with the new field) are also critical.
You can take a look at one potential example of such test in:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282
-->

- Unit test for the API's validation with the feature enabled and disabled.

> - Unit test for the kubelet with the feature enabled and disabled.

Reviewer 7: While Both these are useful, these are more of feature tests.

By enablement/disablement tests we more mean tests that change the value of FG in the meantime of the test.
At the very least, the test mentioned in the template above should be implemented for the new API.

Author: Thanks, added.

from the controllers. This proposal is also designed to address the gap in
Job `podRestartPolicy`. Currently `podRestartPolicy` only supported
`restartPolicy=Never`, and container in-place restarat will not be considered
a failure of the pod.

#### Unintended Restart Loops

A container might persistently exit with an "ignored" exit code due to
an unresolvable underlying issue, leading to frequent restarts that consume
node resources and potentially mask the problem.

The container restart will still follow the exponential backoff to avoid
excessive resource consumption due to restarts.

## Design Details

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

The proposal is to implement a simple API with the very limited set of
allowed values. The shape of API is informed by some future improvements
we may need to implement as described here: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3329#issuecomment-1571643421

```

> restartPolicy: Never

Reviewer 3: @dchen1107 I remember you had a concern with having `Never` pod with the container inside it that has restart count increasing. How strong is this concern? Strong enough to iontroduce the `restartPolicy: Custom`?

the existing assumptions on pod level restart policy. Pod with `restartPolicy=Never`
may have containers restarted and have the restart count higher than 0. This may
also affect how Job `podFailurePolicy` interacts with pod failures.

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

#### Controllers managing pod failures

Controllers that manage workloads based on Pod failures (like Job with
podFailurePolicy) might misinterpret the Pod's state. A container restarting
due to an "ignored" exit code might not increment the Pod's restart count
in a way that these controllers expect for failure accounting.

A clearer definition of pod restart status should be delegated to the kubelet
from the controllers. This proposal is also designed to address the gap in
Job `podRestartPolicy`. Currently `podRestartPolicy` only supported

> `restartPolicy=Never`, and container in-place restarat will not be considered

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`restartPolicy=Never`, and container in-place restart will not be considered
```

Author: Thanks, fixed.

a failure of the pod.

#### Unintended Restart Loops

A container might persistently exit with an "ignored" exit code due to
an unresolvable underlying issue, leading to frequent restarts that consume
node resources and potentially mask the problem.

The container restart will still follow the exponential backoff to avoid
excessive resource consumption due to restarts.

> ## Design Details

Reviewer 4: How does this interact with PodFailurePolicy?

Author: Added discussion around Job's PodFailurePolicy. Basically, this shouldn't affect how Job handles pod failures. Job only checks container exit codes (for PodFailurePolicy) when the Pod finished (and restartPolicy=Never). However, if the container is restarted by the proposed container restart policy, the pod will still be Running, and Job controller will not kick in.

<!--
This section should contain enough information that the specifics of your
change are understandable. This may include API specs (though not always
required) or even code snippets. If there's any ambiguity about HOW your
proposal will be implemented, this is the place to discuss them.
-->

The proposal is to implement a simple API with the very limited set of
allowed values. The shape of API is informed by some future improvements
we may need to implement as described here: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3329#issuecomment-1571643421

```
restartPolicy: Never
containers:
- name: myapp1
  # the default behavior is inherited from the Pod’s restartPolicy
  restartPolicy: Custom 

>   # pod-level API for specifying container restart rules

Reviewer 4: This API is at the container level it seems.

Author: Yes, just mentioning it here since there are some discussion around whether we need to introduce another pod-level restart policy https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5308#discussion_r2093738649

Author: We discussed this with @mimowo, the conclusion is basically this will not change how JobFailurePolicy is evaluated, because container restart policy is handled by Kubelet. If the container is restarted by kubelet, the Pod will still be Running, which means Job controller will not be triggered to evaluate the JobFailurePolicy at all. I added some more discussion in the Caveat section.
